The C++ client library for PostgreSQL {#mainpage}
=================================================

The Dmitigr Pgfe ([PostgreSQL] Frontend) is a client API to [PostgreSQL] servers written in C++.
The development is focused on easines and robustness of use rather than super-duper performance.
**ATTENTION, this software is "beta" quality, and the API is a subject to change**.
Any [feedback][mailbox] (*especially results of testing*) is highly appreciated! Together we can
make Pgfe library *really* production-ready!

Please note, this tutorial can also be viewed at [the official Pgfe documentation site][doc].
Because of the Pgfe documentation is generated by [Doxygen], most of references to the classes
and methods on the official documentation site are clickable, which makes the familiarization
more convenient. Also there are [overview class diagram][doc_diagram]
of the API for better understanding.

Hello, World
============

```cpp
#include <dmitigr/pgfe.hpp>
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
  namespace pgfe = dmitigr::pgfe;
  try {
    const auto conn = pgfe::Connection_options::make()->
      set(pgfe::Communication_mode::tcp)->
      set_tcp_host_name("localhost")->
      set_database("pgfe_test")->
      set_username("pgfe_test")->
      set_password("pgfe_test")->
      make_connection();

    conn->connect();
    conn->execute("SELECT generate_series($1::int, $2::int) AS natural", 1, 3);
    conn->for_each([](const auto* const row) {
      std::cout << pgfe::to<int>(row->data("natural")) << "\n";
    });
    std::cout << "The " << conn->completion()->operation_name() << " query is done.\n";

    // As a sample of error handling let's provoke syntax error and handle it away.
    try {
      conn->perform("PROVOKE SYNTAX ERROR");
    } catch (const pgfe::Server_exception& e) {
      if (e.error()->code() == pgfe::Server_errc::c42_syntax_error)
        std::cout << "Error " << e.error()->sqlstate() << " is handled as expected.\n";
      else
        throw;
    }
  } catch (const std::exception& e) {
    std::cerr << "Oops: " << e.what() << "\n";
  }
}
```

Features
========

Current API allows to work with:

  - database connections (in both blocking and non-blocking IO manner);
  - prepared statements (named parameters are supported);
  - [SQLSTATE][errcodes] codes (as simple as with enums);
  - extensible data type conversions (including support of [PostgreSQL] arrays to/from STL containers conversions);
  - dynamic SQL;
  - SQL queries separately of C++ code.

Features of the near future
---------------------------

The urgent TODO-list includes support of:

  - [Large Objects][lob] via IO streams of the Standard C++ library;
  - conversions for `dmitigr::pgfe::Composite` data type;
  - yet more convenient work with arrays of variable dimensions at runtime;
  - COPY command;
  - C API.

Tutorial
========

Client programs that use Pgfe should include header file `dmitigr/pgfe.hpp` and
must link with `dmitigr_pgfe` (or the debug build - `dmitigr_pgfed`)  library.
Logically Pgfe library consists of the following parts:

  - Main (client/server communication);
  - Large objects (future feature, see the above TODO-list);
  - Data types conversions;
  - Errors (exceptions and error codes);
  - Utilities.

**WARNING** Headers other than `dmitigr/pgfe.hpp` should be *avoided* to use in
applications since that headers are subject to reorganize. Also the namespace
`dmitigr::pgfe::detail`  consists of the implementation details and *should not*
be used in the client code.

Connecting to a server
----------------------

The class dmitigr::pgfe::Connection is a central abstraction of Pgfe library. By
using methods of this class it is possible to:

  - send requests to a server;
  - receive responses from a server (see dmitigr::pgfe::Response);
  - receive signals from a server (see dmitigr::pgfe::Signal);
  - perform other operations that depend on a server data (such as dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::to_quoted_literal()).

To make an instance of the class dmitigr::pgfe::Connection, the instance of the
class dmitigr::pgfe::Connection_options is required. A copy of this instance
is always *read-only* accessible via dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::options().

Example 1. Creation of the connection with customized options:

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<dmitigr::pgfe::Connection> create_customized_connection()
{
  return pgfe::Connection_options::make()->
    set(Communication_mode::tcp)->
    set_tcp_host_name("localhost")->
    set_database("db")->
    set_username("user")->
    set_password("password")->
    make_connection();
}
```

Example 2. Creation of the connection with default options:

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<dmitigr::pgfe::Connection> create_default_connection_1()
{
  const auto opts = pgfe::Connection_options::make();
  return pgfe::Connection::make(opts.get());
}
```

Example 3. Creation of the connection with default options:

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<dmitigr::pgfe::Connection> create_default_connection_2()
{
  return pgfe::Connection::make();
}
```

After creation of an object of type dmitigr::pgfe::Connection there are two ways to connect available:

  - synchronous by using dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::connect();
  - asynchronous by using dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::connect_async().

Executing commands
------------------

SQL commands can be executed through either of two ways:

  1. by using "simple query" protocol (which implies parsing and executing a
     query by a server on each request) with dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::perform();
  2. by using "extended query" protocol (which implies using of parameterizable prepared statements):
     + by explicitly preparing a statement with dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::prepare_statement()
       and executing it with dmitigr::pgfe::Prepared_statement::execute();
     + by implicitly preparing and executing an unnamed prepared statement with
       dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::execute().

Commands can be executed and processed asynchronously, i.e. without need of waiting
a server response(-s), and thus, without thread blocking. For this purpose the
methods of the class dmitigr::pgfe::Connection with the suffix `_async` shall be used,
such as dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::perform_async() or dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::prepare_statement_async().

Prepared statements can be parameterized with either positional or named parameters.
In order to use the named parameters, a SQL string must be preparsed by Pgfe.
Preparsed SQL strings are represented by the class dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_string.
Unparameterized prepared statements, or prepared statements parameterized by
only positional parameters *does not* require to be preparsed. Thus, there is no
need to create an instance of dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_string and [`std::string`][std_string] should
be used instead.

To set a value of a prepared statement's parameter it should be converted to an
object of the class dmitigr::pgfe::Data. For convenience, there is the templated
method dmitigr::pgfe::Prepared_statement::set_parameter(std::size_t, T&&) which
do such a conversion by using one of the specialization of the template structure
dmitigr::pgfe::Conversions.

Example 1. Simple querying.

```cpp
void simple_query(dmitigr::pgfe::Connection* conn)
{
  conn->perform("SELECT generate_series(1, 3) AS num");
}
```

Example 2. Implicit execution of the unnamed prepared statement.

```cpp
void implicit_prepare_and_execute(dmitigr::pgfe::Connection* conn)
{
  conn->execute("SELECT generate_series($1::int, $2::int) AS num", 1, 3);
}
```

Example 3. Explicit execution of the named prepared statement with named parameters.

```cpp
void explicit_prepare_and_execute(const std::string& name, dmitigr::pgfe::Connection* conn)
{
  static const auto sql = dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_string::make("SELECT generate_series(:infinum::int, :supremum::int) AS num");
  auto ps = conn->prepare_statement(sql.get(), name);
  ps->set_parameter("infinum",  1);
  ps->set_parameter("supremum", 3);
  ps->execute();
}
```

Responses handling
------------------

Server responses are represented by the classes, inherited from dmitigr::pgfe::Response:

  - Responses that are server errors are represented by the class dmitigr::pgfe::Error.
    Each server error is identifiable by a so-called [SQLSTATE][errcodes] code. In Pgfe *each* such
    a code is represented by the member of the enum class dmitigr::pgfe::Server_errc,
    integrated in framework for reporting errors provided by the standard library in
    [`<system_error>`][system_error]. Therefore, working with [SQLSTATE][errcodes] codes is as simple
    and safe as with [`std::error_code`][std_error_code] and enumerated types! For example:

```cpp
void handle_error_example(dmitigr::pgfe::Connection* conn)
{
  try {
    conn->perform("PROVOKE SYNTAX ERROR");
  } catch (const dmitigr::pgfe::Server_exception& e) {
    assert(e.error()->code() == dmitigr::pgfe::Server_errc::c42_syntax_error);
  }
}
```

  - Responses that are rows are represented by the class dmitigr::pgfe::Row. Objects of
    this class can be accessed by using dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::row() and/or
    dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::release_row(). However, it is best to use the method
    dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::for_each() for rows processing. Be aware, that before
    executing the subsequent operations, all of the rows **must** be processed.

  - Responses that are prepared statements are represented by the class
    dmitigr::pgfe::Prepared_statement. Prepared statements are accessible via the
    method dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::prepared_statement().

  - Responses that indicates success of operations are represented by the class
    dmitigr::pgfe::Completion. Such responses can be accessed by calling
    dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::completion() and/or dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::release_completion().
    Alternatively, to process completion responses the method dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::complete()
    can be used.

To *initiate* asynchronous retrieving of the *first* response (i.e. with no blocking the thread),
methods of the class dmitigr::pgfe::Connection with the suffix "_async" must be used. Otherwise,
Pgfe will wait for the first response and if that response is dmitigr::pgfe::Error, an object of
type dmitigr::pgfe::Server_exception will be thrown as exception. This object provides access to
the retrieved object of type dmitigr::pgfe::Error, which contains the error details.

Server responses can be *retrieved*:
  - synchronously by using the methods such as dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::wait_response()
    and dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::wait_last_response();
  - asynchronously by using the methods such as dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::collect_server_messages()
    and dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::socket_readiness();

Data type conversions
---------------------

Pgfe ships with support of conversions for *fundamental and standard C++ types*. Conversions for
special PostgreSQL types such as [Date/Time Types][datatype-datetime] aren't provided out of the box,
since many implementations of these types are possible at the client side. Instead it's up to the
user to deside what implementation to use. (If such conversions are needed at all.) For example,
the template structure dmitigr::pgfe::Conversions can be easily specialized to perform conversions
between PostgreSQL [Date/Time Types][datatype-datetime] and types from the [Boost.Date_Time][boost-datetime]
library.

The class dmitigr::pgfe::Data is designed to store:

  - the values of prepared statements' parameters;
  - the data retrieved from [PostgreSQL] server.

The template structure dmitigr::pgfe::Conversions are used by:

  - dmitigr::pgfe::Prepared_statement::set_parameter(std::size_t, T&&) - to perfrom data
    conversions from objects or type `T` to objects of type dmitigr::pgfe::Data;
  - dmitigr::pgfe::to() - to perform data conversions from objects of type
    dmitigr::pgfe::Data to objects of the specified type `T`.

There is the partial specialization of the template structure dmitigr::pgfe::Conversions to
perform conversions from/to [PostgreSQL] arrays representation to any combination of the STL
containers. (At the moment, arrays conversions are only implemented for dmitigr::pgfe::Data_format::text
format.) In general, any [PostgreSQL] array can be represented as `Container<Optional<T>>`, where:

  - `Container` - is the template class of the container such as [`std::vector`][std_vector]
    or [`std::list`][std_list] or [`std::deque`][std_deque];
  - `Optional` - is the template class of the optional value holder such as [`std::optional`][std_optional]
    or `boost::optional`. The special value like [`std::nullopt`][std_nullopt] represents the SQL `NULL`;
  - T - is the type of elements of the array. It can be `Container<Optional<T>>` to represent
    the multidimensional array.

In case when all the array elements are non-NULL, such an array can be represented as just the container with
elements of type T (ie no need to make it optional). But in case when the source array (which comes from the
PostgreSQL server) contain at least one NULL element a runtime exception will be thrown.

In light of the above:

  - the types `Container<Optional<T>>`, `Container<Optional<Container<Optional<T>>>>`, ...
    can be used to represent N-dimensional arrays of `T` which *can* contain NULL values;

  - the types `Container<T>`, `Container<Container<T>>`, ... can be used to represent
    N-dimensional arrays of `T` which *cannot* contain NULL values;

User-defined data conversions could be implemented by either:

  - implementing the overloads of `operator<<` and `operator>>` for [`std::ostream`][std_ostream] and [`std::istream`][std_istream]
    respectively;
  - specializing the template structure dmitigr::pgfe::Conversions. (With this approach overheads
    of standard IO streams can be avoided.)

Signals handling
----------------

Server signals are represented by the classes, inherited from dmitigr::pgfe::Signal:

  - signals that are server notices are represented by the class dmitigr::pgfe::Notice;
  - signals that are server notifications are represented by the class dmitigr::pgfe::Notification.

Signals can be handled:

  - synchronously, by using the signal handlers (see dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::set_notice_handler(),
    dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::set_notification_handler());
  - asynchronously, by using the methods that provides access to the retrieved signals directly (see
    dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::notice(), dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::notification()).

Signal handlers, being set, called by dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::handle_signals(). The latter is
called automatically while waiting a response. If no handler is set, corresponding signals will be
collected in the internal storage and can be popped up by using dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::pop_notice()
and/or dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::pop_notification() depending on the type of signal.

**WARNING** If signals are not popped up from the internal storage it may cause memory exhaustion!
Thus, signals must be handled anyway!

Dynamic SQL
-----------

The standard tools like [`std::string`][std_string] or [`std::ostringstream`][std_ostringstream] can be used to make
SQL strings dynamically. However, in some cases it is more convenient to use the
class dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_string for this purpose.

Consider the following statement:

```cpp
auto sql = dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_string::make("SELECT :expr::int, ':expr'");
```

This statement has one named parameter `expr` and one string constant `':expr'`. If prepare this
statement with dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::prepare_statement(), the actual prepared statement
parsed by the server will looks like:

```sql
SELECT $1::int, ':expr'
```

Before preparing the statement, it is possible to replace the named parameters of the SQL
string with another SQL string by using dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_string::replace_parameter().
For example:

```cpp
auto sql = dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_string::make("SELECT :expr::int, ':expr'");
sql->replace_parameter("expr", "sin(:expr1::int), cos(:expr2::int)");
```

Now the statement has two named parameters, and looks like:

```sql
SELECT sin(:expr1::int), cos(:expr2::int), ':expr'
```

Note, that the quoted string `:expr` is not affected by the replacement operation!

Working with SQL queries separately of C++ code
-----------------------------------------------

The idea of the approach is to store the SQL queries in the separate place, such as a text file.
First, the content of this file must be read into the object of type [`std::string`][std_string].
Next, the object of type dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_vector should be created with dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_vector::make().
Finally, the required SQL string can be accessed by the index or by the extra data, such as, for example,
the SQL string identifier which was specified in advance in the related comments of the query.
Let's consider the simple SQL input:

```sql
-- This is query 1
--
-- $id$plus-one$id$
SELECT :n::int + 1, ';'; -- note, the semicolons in quotes are allowed!

/* This is query 2
 *
 * $id$minus-one$id$
 */
SELECT :n::int - 1
```

The vector of two SQL strings can be created from this input with dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_vector::make().
These objects has an extra data specified by the dollar-quoted string constants. ([The dollar quoting
syntax][dollar-quoting] are well-know way of quoting string literals in [PostgreSQL].) Next, these
queries can be easily accessed by using the dmitigr::pgfe::Sql_vector API, for example:

```cpp
std::string read_file(const std::filesystem::path& path);

void foo()
{
  namespace pgfe = dmitigr::pgfe;
  const std::string input = read_file("bunch.sql");
  auto bunch = pgfe::Sql_vector::make(input);
  auto* minus_one = bunch->sql_string("id", "minus-one"); // SELECT :n::int - 1
  auto*  plus_one = bunch->sql_string("id",  "plus-one"); // SELECT :n::int + 1, ';'
  // Next, working with the queries ...
}
```

Exceptions
----------

Pgfe may throw:

  - an instance of the type [`std::logic_error`][std_logic_error] when:
      + API contract requirements are violated;
      + an assertion failure has occurred (it is possible only with the "debug" build of Pgfe);
  - an instance of the types [`std::runtime_error`][std_runtime_error] or dmitigr::pgfe::Client_exception
    when some kind of runtime error occured on the client side;
  - the instance of the type dmitigr::pgfe::Server_exception when some error occured
    on the server side and the methods like dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::wait_response_throw() is in use
    (which is case when using dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::perform(), dmitigr::pgfe::Connection::execute() etc).

Thread safety
-------------

By default, if not explicitly documented, all functions and methods of Pgfe are *not*
thread safe. Thus, in most cases, some of the synchronization mechanisms (like mutexes)
must be used to work with the same object from several threads.

Documentation
=============

The Dmitigr Pgfe documentation is located at the official site [here][doc].

Download
========

The Dmitigr Pgfe repository is located at Github [here][github].

Installation and consuming
==========================

Dependencies
------------

- [CMake] build system version 3.13+;
- C++17 compiler ([GCC] 7.4+ or [Microsoft Visual C++][Visual_Studio] 15.7+);
- [dmitigr_common] library;
- [libpq] library (the underlying engine).

Build time settings
-------------------

Settings that may be specified at build time by using [CMake] variables are:
  1. the type of the build (only meaningful to single-configuration generators);
  2. the flag to build the shared library;
  3. the flag to build the tests (default is on);
  4. dependencies;
  5. installation directories;
  6. default values of the connection options.

Details (may need to use horizontal scrolling for full view):

|CMake variable|Possible values|Default on Unix|Default on Windows|
|:-------------|:--------------|:--------------|:-----------------|
|**The type of the build**||||
|CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE|Debug \| Release \| RelWithDebInfo \| MinSizeRel|Debug|Debug|
|**The flag to build the shared library**||||
|BUILD_SHARED_LIBS|On \| Off|On|On|
|**The flag to build the tests**||||
|DMITIGR_PGFE_BUILD_TESTS|On \| Off|On|On|
|**Dependencies**||||
|LIBPQ_PREFIX|*a path*|*not set (rely on CMake)*|*not set (rely on CMake)*|
|LIBPQ_LIB_PREFIX|*a path*|${LIBPQ_PREFIX}|${LIBPQ_PREFIX}|
|LIBPQ_INCLUDE_PREFIX|*a path*|${LIBPQ_PREFIX}|${LIBPQ_PREFIX}|
|**Installation directories**||||
|CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX|*an absolute path*|"/usr/local"|"%ProgramFiles%\dmitigr_pgfe"|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CMAKE_INSTALL_DIR|*a path relative to CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX*|"share/dmitigr_pgfe/cmake"|"cmake"|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_DOC_INSTALL_DIR|*a path relative to CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX*|"share/dmitigr_pgfe/doc"|"doc"|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_LIB_INSTALL_DIR|*a path relative to CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX*|"lib"|"lib"|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_INCLUDE_INSTALL_DIR|*a path relative to CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX*|"include"|"include"|
|**Default values of the connection options**||||
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_COMMUNICATION_MODE|uds \| tcp|uds|tcp|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_UDS_DIRECTORY|*an absolute path*|/tmp|*unavailable*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_UDS_FILE_EXTENSION|*a string*|5432|*unavailable*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_UDS_REQUIRE_SERVER_PROCESS_USERNAME|*a string*|*not set*|*unavailable*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_TCP_KEEPALIVES_ENABLED|On \| Off|Off|Off|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_TCP_KEEPALIVES_IDLE|*non-negative number*|*null (system default)*|*null (system default)*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_TCP_KEEPALIVES_INTERVAL|*non-negative number*|*null (system default)*|*null (system default)*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_TCP_KEEPALIVES_COUNT|*non-negative number*|*null (system default)*|*null (system default)*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_TCP_HOST_ADDRESS|*IPv4(v6) address*|127.0.0.1|127.0.0.1|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_TCP_HOST_NAME|*a string*|localhost|localhost|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_TCP_HOST_PORT|*a number*|5432|5432|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_USERNAME|*a string*|postgres|postgres|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_DATABASE|*a string*|postgres|postgres|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_PASSWORD|*a string*|""|""|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_KERBEROS_SERVICE_NAME|*a string*|*null (not used)*|*null (not used)*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_SSL_ENABLED|On \| Off|Off|Off|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_SSL_SERVER_HOST_NAME_VERIFICATION_ENABLED|On \| Off|Off|Off|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_SSL_COMPRESSION_ENABLED|On \| Off|Off|Off|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_SSL_CERTIFICATE_FILE|*an absolute path*|*null (libpq's default)*|*null (libpq's default)*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_SSL_PRIVATE_KEY_FILE|*an absolute path*|*null (libpq's default)*|*null (libpq's default)*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_SSL_CERTIFICATE_AUTHORITY_FILE|*an absolute path*|*null (libpq's default)*|*null (libpq's default)*|
|DMITIGR_PGFE_CONNECTION_SSL_CERTIFICATE_REVOCATION_LIST_FILE|*an absolute path*|*null (libpq's default)*|*null (libpq's default)*|

Installation in common
----------------------

The only dependences of Pgfe are [dmitigr_common] and [libpq].

First, [dmitigr_common] must be installed. The installation is trivial as described on its page.

**WARNING** It's highly recommended to update the [dmitigr_common] library (just pull and reinstall)
before building the Pgfe library!

As for [libpq], [CMake] will try to locate it automatically. Although, it's possible to manually
specify the location of [libpq] by using the following [CMake] variables:

  - `LIBPQ_PREFIX` - can be used to speficy a prefix for both binary and headers of [libpq]. For example,
    if [PostgreSQL] installed relocatably into `/usr/local/pgsql`, the value of `LIBPQ_PREFIX`
    may be set accordingly at command line such as: `-DLIBPQ_PREFIX=/usr/local/pgsql`;
  - `LIBPQ_LIB_PREFIX` - similar to the above, but specifies a *prefix* of the [libpq] binary file (SO or DLL);
  - `LIBPQ_INCLUDE_PREFIX` - similar to the above, but specifies a *prefix* of the [libpq] headers (namely,
    `libpq-fe.h`).

Installation on Linux
---------------------

    $ git clone https://github.com/dmitigr/pgfe.git
    $ mkdir -p pgfe/build
    $ cd pgfe/build
    $ cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug ..
    $ make
    $ sudo make install

The value of the `CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE` could be replaced. Also, remember about the possibility to specify location
of [libpq] if [CMake] could not detect it automatically (see "Installation in common" section above).

Installation on Microsoft Windows
---------------------------------

Run the Developer Command Prompt for Visual Studio and type:

    > git clone https://github.com/dmitigr/pgfe.git
    > mkdir pgfe\build
    > cd pgfe\build
    > cmake -G "Visual Studio 15 2017 Win64" ..
    > cmake --build . --config Debug

Next, run the Elevated Command Prompt (i.e. the command prompt with administrator privileges) and type:

    > cd pgfe\build
    > cmake -DBUILD_TYPE=Debug -P cmake_install.cmake

If the target architecture is Win32 or ARM, then "Win64" should be replaced by "Win32" or "ARM" accordingly.

To make the installed DLL available for *any* application that depends on it, the symbolic link to the
dmitigr_pgfe.dll (or to the debug version - dmitigr_pgfed.dll) should be created:

  - in %SYSTEMROOT%\System32 for the 64-bit DLL on 64-bit host (or for 32-bit DLL on 32-bit host);
  - in %SYSTEMROOT%\SysWOW64 for the 32-bit DLL on 64-bit host.

To create the symbolic link run the Elevated Command Prompt and use `mklink` command, for example:

    > cd /d %SYSTEMROOT%\System32
    > mklink dmitigr_pgfed.dll "%ProgramFiles%\dmitigr_pgfe\lib\dmitigr_pgfed.dll"

The value of the `BUILD_TYPE` could be replaced. Also, remember about the possibility to specify location
of [libpq] if [CMake] could not detect it automatically (see "Installation in common" section above).

**WARNING** The target architecture must corresponds to the bitness of [libpq] to link!

Consuming
---------

If you are using CMake the consuming of the Pgfe library is quite simple. For example:

```cmake
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13)
project(foo)
find_package(dmitigr_pgfe REQUIRED)
set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD 17)
set(CXX_STANDARD_REQUIRED ON)
add_executable(foo foo.cpp)
target_link_libraries(foo dmitigr_pgfe)
```

The above code snippet is minimal CMakeLists.txt that enough to build the
application `foo` that depends on the Pgfe library.

License
=======

Pgfe library is distributed under zlib license. For conditions of distribution and use,
see files `LICENSE.txt` or `pgfe.hpp`.

Contributions, sponsorship, partnership
=======================================

Pgfe has been developed on the own funds. Donations are welcome!

If you are using Pgfe for commercial purposes it is reasonable to donate or
even sponsor the further development of Pgfe.

To make a donation, via [PayPal] please go [here][paypal1] or [here][paypal2].

If you need a commercial support, or you need to develop a custom client-side or
server-side software based on [PostgreSQL], please contact us by sending email to <dmitigr@gmail.com>.

Pgfe is a free software. Enjoy using it!

Feedback
========

Any feedback are welcome. Contact us by sending email to <dmitigr@gmail.com>.

Copyright
=========

Copyright (C) Dmitry Igrishin

[dmitigr_common]: https://github.com/dmitigr/common.git

[doc]: http://dmitigr.ru/en/projects/pgfe/doc/
[doc_diagram]: http://dmitigr.ru/en/projects/pgfe/doc/pgfe.class.violet.html
[github]: https://github.com/dmitigr/pgfe.git
[mailbox]: mailto:dmitigr@gmail.com
[paypal1]: https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_donations&business=38TY2K8KYKYJC&lc=US&item_name=Pgfe%20library&item_number=1&currency_code=USD&bn=PP%2dDonationsBF%3abtn_donateCC_LG%2egif%3aNonHosted
[paypal2]: https://paypal.me/dmitigr

[PostgreSQL]: https://www.postgresql.org/
[dollar-quoting]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/sql-syntax-lexical.html#SQL-SYNTAX-DOLLAR-QUOTING
[datatype-datetime]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-datetime.html
[errcodes]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/errcodes-appendix.html
[libpq]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/libpq.html
[lob]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/largeobjects.html

[boost-datetime]: https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/release/libs/date_time/

[CMake]: https://cmake.org/
[Doxygen]: http://doxygen.org/
[GCC]: https://gcc.gnu.org/
[PayPal]: https://paypal.com/
[Visual_Studio]: https://www.visualstudio.com/

[system_error]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/header/system_error
[std_deque]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/deque
[std_error_code]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/error/error_code
[std_istream]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/io/basic_istream
[std_list]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/list
[std_logic_error]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/error/logic_error
[std_optional]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional
[std_ostringstream]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/io/basic_ostringstream
[std_ostream]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/io/basic_ostream
[std_nullopt]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional/nullopt
[std_runtime_error]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/error/runtime_error
[std_string]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/basic_string
[std_vector]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector
